# Superspreader Events

### 1. [Super-spreaders in infectious diseases](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1201971211000245)
**Autor**: Richard Stein (2011)
**Abstract**: Early studies that explored host–pathogen interactions assumed that infected individuals within a population have equal chances of transmitting the infection to others. *Subsequently, in what became known as the 20/80 rule, a small percentage of individuals within any population was observed to control most transmission events*. This empirical rule was shown to govern inter-individual transmission dynamics for many pathogens in several species, and *individuals who infect disproportionately more secondary contacts, as compared to most others, became known as super-spreaders. Studies conducted in the wake of the severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) pandemic revealed that, in the absence of super-spreading events, most individuals infect few, if any, secondary contacts*. The analysis of SARS transmission, and reports from other outbreaks, unveil a complex scenario in which super-spreading events are shaped by multiple factors, including co-infection with another pathogen, immune suppression, changes in airflow dynamics, delayed hospital admission, misdiagnosis, and inter-hospital transfers. *Predicting and identifying super-spreaders open significant medical and public health challenges, and represent important facets of infectious disease management and pandemic preparedness plans*.

**Comentarios**: el R_0 es valioso, pero puede esconder variaciones entre los individuos, y por eso hay que incoporar estas medias. Los superspreaders no son un fenómeno nuevo. Ojo que un superspreader es una persona. Un estudio en Sinagpur, por ejemplo, mostró que para el SARS, de 201 pacientes, el 81% no habían contagiado a nadie, pero 5 tipos habían infectado a 10 o más. Otro estudio mostró que 75% de las infecciones en HK de SARS fueron por SSE. Presenta otros casos similares de SS, y de SSE. Causas para un SS (no se saben bien): strain virulence, higher pathogen shedding, and differences in the host-pathogen relationship. Describe varios casos de personas SS (interesante para médicos). Propone estudiar factores en el host (fisiológicas, de comportamiento, inmunológicas), en el patógeno (virulencia, coinfección), y en el ambiente (crowding, unrecognized disease, interhospital transfers, building ventilation)


### 2. [COVID-19 in schools – the experience in NSW](http://ncirs.org.au/sites/default/files/2020-04/NCIRS%20NSW%20Schools%20COVID_Summary_FINAL%20public_26%20April%202020.pdf)

**Autor**: National Centre for Immunisation Research and Surveillance (2020)
**Descripción**: Los niños no parecen contagiar. 
**Abstract**: This report provides an overview of investigation into all COVID-19 cases in New South Wales (NSW) schools.In NSW, from March to mid-April 2020, 18 individuals (9 students and 9 staff) from 15 schools were confirmed as COVID-19 cases; all  of these individuals had an opportunity to transmit the COVID-19 virus (SARS-CoV-2) to others in their schools. 735 students and 128 staff were close contacts of these initial 18 cases.No teacher or staff member contracted COVID-19 from any of the initial school cases. *One child from a primary school and one child from a high school may have contracted COVID-19 from the initial cases at their schools*.

**Comentarios**: De los 863 contactos que tuvieron, solamente dos estudiantes se enfermaron. No se encontró evidencia de niños infectando maestros. 


### 3. [COVID-19 Superspreader Events in 28 Countries: Critical Patterns and Lessons](https://quillette.com/2020/04/23/covid-19-superspreader-events-in-28-countries-critical-patterns-and-lessons/)
**Autor**: J.Kay (2020)
**Descripción**: Casi todos los SSE son indoor. 

**Comentarios**:  No sabemos muy bien si la COVID-19 se contagia por gotas disparadas, o por aerosol o por superficies. Son tres teorías que llevarían a medidas diferents. Si fueran gotas: máscaras, hablar despacio, evitar toser y estornudar. Si fueran aerosol: mejorar la ventilación, utilizar espacios abiertos. Si fueran superficies: lavarse las manos, desinfectantes. 
Buscó eventos SSE a través de búsquedas como "superspreader", "cluster", "hot-spot", y variantes fuera del inglés ("superpropagadore"). Problemas: muchos no se reportan, otros no se reportan bien por temas de privacidad de la información, no están incluidos países que limitan la información de este tipo de eventos (e.g. Irán y los eventos religiosos en QoM, o Afganistán).
Excluye hospitales y hogares de ancianos, o prisiones o casas, porque no sirven para distinguir la forma de contagio (en todo caso se contagiarían).
*Dato: muchos de los primeros SSEs, fueron casamientos, cumples, y otros eventos con gente de la "farándula" (socialites). La explicación más obvia es porque es gente que viaja más*. 
*Dato: de los 54 eventos que identificó: 9 fueron servicios religiosos, 19 eventos como fiestas de cumpleaños, 5 fueron funerales, 6 eventos cara a cara de negocios. Eso suma el 70%*
Dato: casi todos fueron indoor. Menciona que en China se reportó un patrón similar. 
Los que quedan: gente que iba junto a conciertos, un partido de curling (lugar cerrado, frío), frigoríficos. Lugares con _ruido_ (tenés que hablar más fuerte). 3 eventos fueron espectaculos de mass vinculados a deportes... y ahí la gente festeja y se abraza. 

*When do COVID-19 SSEs happen? Based on the list I’ve
assembled, the short answer is: Wherever and whenever people
are up in each other’s faces, laughing, shouting, cheering, sobbing,
singing, greeting, and praying. You don’t have to be a 19th-century
German bacteriologist or MIT expert in mucosalivary ballistics to
understand what this tells us about the most likely mode of
transmission.*

Interesante: cosas que no están. Ir al cine, al teatro, ir en un tren, en un ómnibus: van todos quietitos y sin hablar. Tampoco los call centers (aunque menciona que algún ejemplo hay), o las escuelas, las universidades, los aviones 

### 4. [Why do some COVID-19 patients infect many others, whereas most don’t spread the virus at all?](https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2020/05/why-do-some-covid-19-patients-infect-many-others-whereas-most-don-t-spread-virus-all#)
**Author**: Kai Kupferschmidt (2020)
**Descripción**: Nota en Science sobre SSE en general. 

**Comentarios**: Describen casos de SSE. Citan la base de datos de LSHTM. Hablan de los SS, y del índice k, el factor de dispersión, que describe cómo una enfermedad agrupa caso. Cuanto más bajo, más de los casos vienen de menos gente. Lloyd-Smith and co-authors estimated that SARS—in which superspreading played a major role—had a k of 0.16. The estimated k for MERS, which emerged in 2012, is about 0.25. In the flu pandemic of 1918, in contrast, the value was about one, indicating that clusters played less of a role. Parece que el COVID, podría ser hasta de 0.1, según un artículo reciente de Kucharski (del LSHTM). No se sabe por qué, pero empieza a hablar de los SS. Otra vez: indoor es mucho más complicado (en Japón reportaron hasta 19 veces). Menciona que detectar los clusters no es fácil, porque la gente recuerda más una cosa que otras. 

### 5.[Indoor transmission of SARS-CoV-2](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.04.20053058v1) 
**Author**: Qian et al. (2020)
**Descripción**: reporte de China, mayoría de los clusters son indoor
**Abstract**: Background: By early April 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic had infected nearly one million people and had spread to nearly all countries worldwide. It is essential to understand where and how SARS-CoV-2 is transmitted.Methods: Case reports were extracted from the local Municipal Health Commissions of 320prefectural cities (municipalities) in China, not including Hubei province, between 4 January and 11 February 2020. We identified all outbreaks involving three or more cases and reviewed the major characteristics of the enclosed spaces in which the outbreaks were reported and associated indoor environmental issues. Results: *Three hundred and eighteen (318) outbreaks with three or more cases were identified*,involving 1245 confirmed cases in 120 prefectural cities. We divided the venues in which the outbreaks occurred into six categories: homes, transport, food, entertainment, shopping, and miscellaneous. Among the identified outbreaks, 53·8% involved three cases, 26·4% involved four cases, and *only 1·6% involved ten or more cases*. Home outbreaks were the dominant category (254 of 318 outbreaks; 79·9%), followed by transport (108; 34·0%; note that many outbreaks involved more than one venue category). Most home outbreaks involved three to five cases. *We identified only a single outbreak in an outdoor environment, which involved two cases*. Conclusions: *All identified outbreaks of three or more cases occurred in an indoor environment*, which confirms that sharing indoor space is a major SARS-CoV-2 infection risk.

**Comentarios**:  Definen cluster (ver Definciones). Definen brote (ver definiciones).Categorías de los clusters: homes, transporte, restaurantes, entretenimiento, shopping y varios (hospitales, hoteles, termas, etc. ). Categoría de individuos infectados: familia, parientes, conectados socialmente y no conectados socialmente.  El tamaño promedio de los brotes era más grande cuando estaban vinculados a shoppings (4.7) y restaurantes (4.9 personas). Hubo muchos picos cerca del año nuevo chino, y el Lantern Festival. Con los brotes grandes (más de seis casos), no hay un patrón, parecen ser esporádicos. Observan que los ambientes individuales cerrados donde vivimos y trabajamos son los lugares más comunes (aunque esto no es raro en una cuarentena...). 


### 6. [What settings have been linked to SARS-CoV-2 transmission clusters?](https://wellcomeopenresearch.org/articles/5-83)
**Autor**: Leclerc et al. (2020)
**Abstract**: Background: Concern about the health impact of novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 has resulted in widespread enforced reductions in people’s movement (“lockdowns”). However, there are increasing concerns about the severe economic and wider societal consequences of these measures. Some countries have begun to lift some of the rules on physical distancing in a stepwise manner, with differences in what these “exit strategies” entail and their timeframes. *The aim of this work was to inform such exit strategies by exploring the types of indoor and outdoor settings where transmission of SARS-CoV-2 has been reported to occur and result in clusters of cases*. Identifying potential settings that result in transmission clusters allows these to be kept under close surveillance and/or to remain closed as part of strategies that aim to avoid a resurgence in transmission following the lifting of lockdown measures.
Methods: We performed a systematic review of available literature and media reports to find settings reported in peer reviewed articles and media with these characteristics. *These sources are curated and made available in an editable online database*.
Results: We found many examples of SARS-CoV-2 clusters linked to a wide range of mostly indoor settings. Few reports came from schools, many from households, and an increasing number were reported in hospitals and elderly care settings across Europe.
Conclusions: We identified possible places that are linked to clusters of COVID-19 cases and could be closely monitored and/or remain closed in the first instance following the progressive removal of lockdown restrictions. However, in part due to the limits in surveillance capacities in many settings, the gathering of information such as cluster sizes and attack rates is limited in several ways: inherent recall bias, biased media reporting and missing data. 

**Comentarios**: Esto podría ayudar a las estrategias post-lockdown para decidir qué vigilar o qué cosas deberían permanecer cerradas. Definen setting como un lugar donde se registró transmisión que resultó en un cluster. Definen cluster como la primera genración de contagios a partir de una persona (en nuestras definiciones eso sería un brote). Buscan en la literatura PubMed con la palabra cluster. Encontraron 152 eventos, de 18 tipos. La mayoría son indoor. Los clusters más grandes se reportan menos (iglesias, barcos). Poquitas escuelas, y los que se infectan son los maestros. Los clusters grandes: eventos religiosos, no se previene!. Más de 100 casos: residenciales, hospitales, barcos. Son peligrosos porque son gente mayor, y por lo tanto les pega peor la enfermedad. Otros con más de 50 casos: sport, bars, shopping, y conferencias. Están muy cerca, y encima (en las religiosas y en las conferencias) por mucho tiempo. Dato muy intersante: cuando hablamos de contact tracing, generalmente seguimos infectados, y podría ser interesante seguir *lugares* candidatos. Por ejemplo: *podríamos avisar cuando hubo mucha gente junta en un lugar de riesgo*

### 7. [Closed environments facilitate secondary transmission of coronavirus disease 2019](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.02.28.20029272v2.full.pdf)
**Autor**: Nishiura et al. (2020) **Abstract**  Objective: To identify common features of cases with novel coronavirus disease 23 (COVID-19) so as to better understand what factors promote secondary transmission 24 including superspreading events.25 Methods: *A total of 110 cases* were examined among *eleven clusters* and sporadic cases, 26 and investigated who acquired infection from whom. The clusters included four in 27 Tokyo and one each in Aichi, Fukuoka, Hokkaido, Ishikawa, Kanagawa and Wakayama 28 prefectures. The number of secondary cases generated by each primary case was 29 calculated using *contact tracing data*. Results: Of the 110 cases examined, 27 (24.6%) were primary cases who generated 31 secondary cases. *The odds that a primary case transmitted COVID-19 in a closed 32 environment was 18.7 times greater compared to an open-air environment* (95% 33 confidence interval [CI]: 6.0, 57.9). Conclusions: It is plausible that closed environments contribute to secondary 35 transmission of COVID-19 and promote superspreading events. Our findings are also 36 consistent with the declining incidence of COVID-19 cases in China, as gathering in 37 closed environments was prohibited in the wake of the rapid spread of the disease. 

**Comentarios**: Incluyeron gimnasiso, un barco restaurante, hospitales, y un festival  donde había carpas para comer con ventilación mínima. De los 110 casos, 27 contagiaron al resto. 7 de los 110 casos contagiaron a más de 3.


### 8 - [Estimating the overdispersion in COVID-19 transmission using outbreak sizes outside China](https://wellcomeopenresearch.org/articles/5-67)
**Autor**: Endo et al. (2020) **Abstract**": Background: A novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak has now spread to a number of countries worldwide. While sustained transmission chains of human-to-human transmission suggest high basic reproduction number R0, variation in the number of secondary transmissions (often characterised by so-called superspreading events) may be large as some countries have observed fewer local transmissions than others. Methods: We quantified individual-level variation in COVID-19 transmission by applying a mathematical model to observed outbreak sizes in affected countries. We extracted the number of imported and local cases in the affected countries from the World Health Organization situation report and applied a branching process model where the number of secondary transmissions was assumed to follow a negative-binomial distribution. Results: Our model suggested a high degree of individual-level variation in the transmission of COVID-19. Within the current consensus range of R0 (2-3), the overdispersion parameter k of a negative-binomial distribution was estimated to be around 0.1 (median estimate 0.1; 95% CrI: 0.05-0.2 for R0 = 2.5), suggesting that 80% of secondary transmissions may have been caused by a small fraction of infectious individuals (~10%). A joint estimation yielded likely ranges for R0 and k (95% CrIs: R0 1.4-12; k 0.04-0.2); however, the upper bound of R0 was not well informed by the model and data, which did not notably differ from that of the prior distribution.
Conclusions: Our finding of a highly-overdispersed offspring distribution highlights a potential benefit to focusing intervention efforts on superspreading. As most infected individuals do not contribute to the expansion of an epidemic, the effective reproduction number could be drastically reduced by preventing relatively rare superspreading events. 

### 9 -  [Superspreading SARS Events, Beijing, 2003](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3322930/)
**Abstract**: Superspreading events were pivotal in the global spread of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS). We investigated superspreading in one transmission chain early in Beijing’s epidemic. Superspreading was defined as transmission of SARS to at least eight contacts. An index patient with onset of SARS 2 months after hospital admission was the source of four generations of transmission to 76 case-patients, including 12 healthcare workers and several hospital visitors. Four (5%) case circumstances met the superspreading definition. Superspreading appeared to be associated with older age (mean 56 vs. 44 years), case fatality (75% vs. 16%, p = 0.02, Fisher exact test), number of close contacts (36 vs. 0.37) and attack rate among close contacts (43% vs. 18.5%, p < 0.025). Delayed recognition of SARS in a hospitalized patient permitted transmission to patients, visitors, and healthcare workers. Older age and number of contacts merit investigation in future studies of superspreading.

### 10 - [Identifying and Interrupting Superspreading Events—Implications for Control of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2](https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/26/6/20-0495_article)
**Autor:** Frieden et al (2020) **Abstract**: It appears inevitable that severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 will continue to spread. Although we still have limited information on the epidemiology of this virus, there have been multiple reports of superspreading events (SSEs), which are associated with both explosive growth early in an outbreak and sustained transmission in later stages. Although SSEs appear to be difficult to predict and therefore difficult to prevent, core public health actions can prevent and reduce the number and impact of SSEs. To prevent and control of SSEs, speed is essential. Prevention and mitigation of SSEs depends, first and foremost, on quickly recognizing and understanding these events, particularly within healthcare settings. Better understanding transmission dynamics associated with SSEs, identifying and mitigating high-risk settings, strict adherence to healthcare infection prevention and control measures, and timely implementation of nonpharmaceutical interventions can help prevent and control severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2, as well as future infectious disease outbreaks.

### 11 - [Superspreading and the effect of individual variation on disease emergence](https://www.nature.com/articles/nature04153)
**Autor**: Lloyd-Smith et al. **Abstract**: Population-level analyses often use average quantities to describe heterogeneous systems, particularly when variation does not arise from identifiable groups. A prominent example, central to our current understanding of epidemic spread, is the basic reproductive number, R0, which is defined as the mean number of infections caused by an infected individual in a susceptible population. Population estimates of R0 can obscure considerable individual variation in infectiousness, as highlighted during the global emergence of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) by numerous ‘superspreading events’ in which certain individuals infected unusually large numbers of secondary cases. For diseases transmitted by non-sexual direct contacts, such as SARS or smallpox, individual variation is difficult to measure empirically, and thus its importance for outbreak dynamics has been unclear. Here we present an integrated theoretical and statistical analysis of the influence of individual variation in infectiousness on disease emergence. Using contact tracing data from eight directly transmitted diseases, we show that the distribution of individual infectiousness around R0 is often highly skewed. Model predictions accounting for this variation differ sharply from average-based approaches, with disease extinction more likely and outbreaks rarer but more explosive. Using these models, we explore implications for outbreak control, showing that individual-specific control measures outperform population-wide measures. Moreover, the dramatic improvements achieved through targeted control policies emphasize the need to identify predictive correlates of higher infectiousness. Our findings indicate that superspreading is a normal feature of disease spread, and to frame ongoing discussion we propose a rigorous definition for superspreading events and a method to predict their frequency.


### 12 - [Stochasticity and heterogeneity in the transmissiondynamics of SARS-CoV-2](https://covid.idmod.org/data/Stochasticity_heterogeneity_transmission_dynamics_SARS-CoV-2.pdf)
**Autor:** Althouse et al. (2020)  **Abstract:** SARS-CoV-2 causing COVID-19 disease has moved rapidly around the globe, infecting millions and killing hundreds ofthousands.  The basic reproduction number, which has been widely used and misused to characterize the transmissibility of the virus, hides the fact that transmission is stochastic, is dominated by a small number of individuals, and is driven by super-spreading events (SSEs). The distinct transmission features, such as high stochasticity under low prevalence, and the central role played by SSEs on transmission dynamics, should not be overlooked. Many explosive SSEs have occurred in indoor settings stoking the pandemic and shaping its spread, such as long-term care facilities, prisons, meat-packing plants,fish factories, cruise ships, family gatherings, parties and night clubs. These SSEs demonstrate the urgent need to understand routes of transmission, while posing an opportunity that outbreak can be effectively contained with targeted interventions toeliminate SSEs. Here, we describe the potential types of SSEs, how they influence transmission, and give recommendationsfor control of SARS-CoV-2

### 13 - [Children and COVID-19. National Institute for Public Health and the Environment, Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport, The Netherlands](https://www.rivm.nl/en/novel-coronavirus-covid-19/children-and-covid-19)
**Autor:**  National Institute for Public Health and the Environment Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport. Netherland
**Abstract:** Worldwide, relatively few children have been reported with COVID-19. Data from the Netherlands also confirms the current understanding: that children play a minor role in the spread of the novel coronavirus. The virus is mainly spread between adults and from adult family members to children. The spread of the virus among children or from children to adults is less common.

### 14 -  [Full genome viral sequences inform patterns of SARS-CoV-2 spread into and within Israel](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.05.21.20104521v1.full.pdf)
**Autor:**: Miller et al. (2020)
**Abstract:** Full genome sequences are increasingly used to track the geographic spread and transmission dynamics of viral pathogens. Here, with a focus on Israel, we sequenced 212 SARS-CoV-2 sequences and usethem to perform a comprehensive analysis to trace the origins and spread of thevirus. A phylogenetic analysis including thousands ofglobally sampled sequencesallowed us to infer multiple independent introductions into Israel, followed by local transmission. Returning travelers from the U.S. contributed dramatically more to viral spread relative to their proportion in incoming infected travelers. Using phylodynamic analysis, we estimated that the basic reproduction number of the virus was initiallyaround~2.0-2.6, dropping by two-thirds following the implementation of social distancing measures. A comparison between reported and model-estimated case numbers indicated high levels of transmission heterogeneity in SARS-CoV-2 spread, with between 1-10% of infected individuals resulting in 80% of secondary infections. Overall, our findings underscore the ability of this virus to efficiently transmit between and within countries, as wellas demonstrate the effectiveness of social distancing measures for reducingits spread.


### 15 - [Pattern of early human-to-human transmission of Wuhan 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV), December 2019 to January 2020 separator](https://www.eurosurveillance.org/content/10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2020.25.4.2000058)
**Autor:** Riou et al.
**Abstract**: Since December 2019, China has been experiencing a large outbreak of a novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) which can cause respiratory disease and severe pneumonia. We estimated the basic reproduction number R0 of 2019-nCoV to be around 2.2 (90% high density interval: 1.4–3.8), indicating the potential for sustained human-to-human transmission. Transmission characteristics appear to be of similar magnitude to severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus (SARS-CoV) and pandemic influenza, indicating a risk of global spread.

### 16 - [High SARS-CoV-2 Attack Rate Following Exposure at a Choir Practice — Skagit County, Washington, March 2020](https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/69/wr/mm6919e6.htm)
**Autor:** Hamner et al.
**Abstract:** What is already known about this topic? Superspreading events involving SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, have been reported. What is added by this report? Following a 2.5-hour choir practice attended by 61 persons, including a symptomatic index patient, 32 confirmed and 20 probable secondary COVID-19 cases occurred (attack rate = 53.3% to 86.7%); three patients were hospitalized, and two died. Transmission was likely facilitated by close proximity (within 6 feet) during practice and augmented by the act of singing. What are the implications for public health practice? The potential for superspreader events underscores the importance of physical distancing, including avoiding gathering in large groups, to control spread of COVID-19. Enhancing community awareness can encourage symptomatic persons and contacts of ill persons to isolate or self-quarantine to prevent ongoing transmission.


### 17 - [Modes of transmission of virus causing COVID-19: implications for IPC precaution recommendations](https://www.who.int/news-room/commentaries/detail/modes-of-transmission-of-virus-causing-covid-19-implications-for-ipc-precaution-recommendations) 
**Autor:** WHO
**Abstract:**: This version updates the 27 March publication by providing definitions of droplets by particle size and adding three relevant publications. 


### 18 - [Aerosol emission and superemission during human speech increase with voice loudness](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-019-38808-z)
**Autor:** Asadi et al.
**Abstract:**: Mechanistic hypotheses about airborne infectious disease transmission have traditionally emphasized the role of coughing and sneezing, which are dramatic expiratory events that yield both easily visible droplets and large quantities of particles too small to see by eye. Nonetheless, it has long been known that normal speech also yields large quantities of particles that are too small to see by eye, but are large enough to carry a variety of communicable respiratory pathogens. Here we show that the rate of particle emission during normal human speech is positively correlated with the loudness (amplitude) of vocalization, ranging from approximately 1 to 50 particles per second (0.06 to 3 particles per cm3) for low to high amplitudes, regardless of the language spoken (English, Spanish, Mandarin, or Arabic). Furthermore, a small fraction of individuals behaves as “speech superemitters,” consistently releasing an order of magnitude more particles than their peers. Our data demonstrate that the phenomenon of speech superemission cannot be fully explained either by the phonic structures or the amplitude of the speech. These results suggest that other unknown physiological factors, varying dramatically among individuals, could affect the probability of respiratory infectious disease transmission, and also help explain the existence of superspreaders who are disproportionately responsible for outbreaks of airborne infectious disease.


### 19 - [Preliminary estimation of the basic reproduction number of novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) in China, from 2019 to 2020: A data-driven analysis in the early phase of the outbreak](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1201971220300539)
**Autor: ** Zhao et al. 
**Abstract**: Backgrounds: An ongoing outbreak of a novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) pneumonia hit a major city in China, Wuhan, December 2019 and subsequently reached other provinces/regions of China and other countries. We present estimates of the basic reproduction number, R0, of 2019-nCoV in the early phase of the outbreak. Methods: Accounting for the impact of the variations in disease reporting rate, we modelled the epidemic curve of 2019-nCoV cases time series, in mainland China from January 10 to January 24, 2020, through the exponential growth. With the estimated intrinsic growth rate (γ), we estimated R0 by using the serial intervals (SI) of two other well-known coronavirus diseases, MERS and SARS, as approximations for the true unknown SI. Findings: The early outbreak data largely follows the exponential growth. We estimated that the mean R0 ranges from 2.24 (95%CI: 1.96–2.55) to 3.58 (95%CI: 2.89–4.39) associated with 8-fold to 2-fold increase in the reporting rate. We demonstrated that changes in reporting rate substantially affect estimates of R0.
Conclusion The mean estimate of R0 for the 2019-nCoV ranges from 2.24 to 3.58, and is significantly larger than 1. Our findings indicate the potential of 2019-nCoV to cause outbreaks.


### 20 - [Heterogeneities in the transmission of infectious agents: Implications for the design of control programs](https://www.pnas.org/content/94/1/338)
**Autor:**: Woolhouse et al (1997)
**Abstract**: From an analysis of the distributions of measures of transmission rates among hosts, we identify an empirical relationship suggesting that, typically, 20% of the host population contributes at least 80% of the net transmission potential, as measured by the basic reproduction number, R0. This is an example of a statistical pattern known as the 20/80 rule. The rule applies to a variety of disease systems, including vector-borne parasites and sexually transmitted pathogens. The rule implies that control programs targeted at the “core” 20% group are potentially highly effective and, conversely, that programs that fail to reach all of this group will be much less effective than expected in reducing levels of infection in the population as a whole.

### 21 - [Transmission potential and severity of COVID-19 in South Korea](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1201971220301508)
**Autor:**: Shim et al. (2020)
**Abstract:** 
Objectives: Since the first case of 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19) identified on Jan 20, 2020, in South Korea, the number of cases rapidly increased, resulting in 6284 cases including 42 deaths as of Mar 6, 2020. To examine the growth rate of the outbreak, we present the first study to report the reproduction number of COVID-19 in South Korea.
Methods: The daily confirmed cases of COVID-19 in South Korea were extracted from publicly available sources. By using the empirical reporting delay distribution and simulating the generalized growth model, we estimated the effective reproduction number based on the discretized probability distribution of the generation interval.
Results: We identified four major clusters and estimated the reproduction number at 1.5 (95% CI: 1.4–1.6). In addition, the intrinsic growth rate was estimated at 0.6 (95% CI: 0.6, 0.7), and the scaling of growth parameter was estimated at 0.8 (95% CI: 0.7, 0.8), indicating sub-exponential growth dynamics of COVID-19. The crude case fatality rate is higher among males (1.1%) compared to females (0.4%) and increases with older age.
Conclusions: Our results indicate an early sustained transmission of COVID-19 in South Korea and support the implementation of social distancing measures to rapidly control the outbreak.

### 22 - [Do superspreaders generate new superspreaders? A hypothesis to explain the propagation pattern of COVI-19](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7211669/)
**Autor:**: Beldoménico (2020)
**Abstract:** The current global propagation of COVID-19 is heterogeneous, with slow transmission continuing in many countries and exponential propagation in others, where the time that it took for the explosive spread to begin varied greatly. It is proposed that this could be explained by cascading superspreading events, in which new infections caused by a superspreader are more likely to be highly infectious. The mechanism suggested for this is related to viral loads. Exposure to high viral loads may result in high-intensity infection, which exposes new cases to high viral loads. This notion is supported by experimental veterinary research.

### 23 - [First Thoughs on superspreader events](https://necsi.edu/first-thoughts-on-superspreader-events)
**Autor**: Shen et al. (2020)

### Definiciones

- **Minimal infectious dose (MID)**: número de partículas virales requeridas para iniciar la cascada que provoca le enfermedad

- **Cluster**: conjunto de casos (tres o más), ligados al mismo lugar durante un tiempo suficientemente corto [5]

- **Brote (outbreak)**: cluster donde se supone hay un paciente índice en común [5]

- **Supercontagiador (superspreader)**: individuos que infectan un número desproporcionadamente grande de contactos secundarios, comparado con los demás [1]

- **Superspreader event**: eventos donde el número de casos secundarios generados por un solo caso primario es mayor al percentil 95 de la distribución (3 o más personas, en general). [7]

- **R**: número de reproducción, promedio de infecciones causadas por una persona

- **k**: factor de dispersión, mide qué tan probable es que la enfermedad se disemine por clusters. Cuanto más bajo, es más probable que la enfermedad la diseminen unos pocos pacientes. 


### Datos

- [Listado de eventos de J.Kay](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1nAWy94mS14sJBtSCBgh6GLCWKP_JvAaz0yanvq4kmzs/edit#gid=1025534428)

- [Base de datos deLondon School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine (LSHTM)](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/16wtnHe4hM6I7TFHXVpLXY8R4GAUzAJ-7NWbKIVvsVuA/edit#gid=1131322210)

